## 2.2.0. Regional Liberty
### 2.2.1.  Justification
Regional liberty applies to societies large and small, from municipalities to nations.  While this typically applies to a civic region legally recognized by a governing body, but this can also apply to indigenous or native communities that continue to exist outside of any larger society or legal framework.  Civic regions within a nation may include states or provinces or similar divisions of territory defined by the nation.  These regions may be subdivided further into counties, towns, cities or other municipalities.  Civic and indigenous regions of each size tend to have identities and shared values that bind the residents together into units of society.  These units behave organically and exist to provide the structure necessary for individual human lives to thrive.  Due to their value and their organic nature, these units of society must be granted certain rights as if they were individuals.

Regional units are porous and generally survive the loss of individuals without lasting consequence.  Regional units are also largely interchangeable, as an individual may belong to multiple regional units with overlapping jurisdiction at any given time and individuals may move from one region to another without lasting consequences on the well-being of the individual.  Given their flexible nature and resilience, regional units of society are given less priority than individual lives or global civilization when it comes to the consideration of conflicting rights.

### 2.2.2.  Rights

#### 2.2.2.1.  The right to self-preservation
Civic and indigenous regions, once established, must be allowed continued existence within the framework of any governing entities.  For example, once a township is established, it must be allowed continued existence in that form until such time that the community can no longer meet any legal requirements mandated by the governing entity such as ability to pay creditors.  See [ section 4 ] for further definitions of civic regions, indigenous regions and governing entity necessary for a clear understanding of this right.

#### 2.2.2.2.   The right to self-governance 
Civic regions must be allowed self-governance within the legal framework of any governing entities.  This includes the right to a regional charter or constitution, selection of regional officials, a regional police force, methods for collecting revenue, etc.  

#### 2.2.2.3.   The right to boundaries
Legally recognized civic regions must be allowed to preserve and protect legally recognized boundaries within the legal framework of any governing entities.

#### 2.2.2.4.   The right to preservation and use of resources
Legally recognized civic regions must be allowed to preserve and use resources found within its boundaries according to the legal framework of any governing entities.

#### 2.2.2.5.   The right to representation 
Legally recognized civic regions must be allowed to represent their interests to governing entities through petitions, elections, representatives, etc.  (senators, representatives, etc).

#### 2.2.2.6.   The right to express regional identity
Legally recognized civic regions must be allowed freedom to express the identify of the community through flags, art, print or electronic media, festivals, etc.  It is possible for members of a civic region to have allegiance to that region as well as other governing entities such as state and country.  No governing body may restrict the free expression of identity of any other legally recognized body within its jurisdiction.  

Inversely, individuals may not be forced to participate in such identification and may not be persecuted or expelled for abstaining.  
